Kivaloo design
==============

Introduction
------------

Kivaloo (pronounced "kee-va-lieu") is a collection of utilities which
together form a data store associating keys of up to 255 bytes with values
of up to 255 bytes.

At present, kivaloo comprises a block store (lbs) providing log-structured
storage within a local filesystem; a key-value store (kvlds) which manages a
log-structured B+Tree and services requests upon it from a single connection;
and a request multiplexer (mux) which accepts multiple connections and routes
requests and responses to and from a single "upstream" connection.

It is likely that other components will be added in the future to add more
features (e.g., replication) or provide alternatives (e.g., other forms of
underlying storage).

Design goals
------------

Kivaloo is designed with the following goals:
1. Consistency.
2. Durability.
3. High throughput for bulk writes.
4. Support for range requests.
5. Fast restarting.
6. Efficient storage of cold data (e.g., 10^6 key-value pairs per op/s).
7. Architectural flexibility.

Kivaloo achieves these goals via the following design decisions:
(a) Operations are only acknowledged after data has been written to disk and
    fsync has been called as required. (1 & 2)
(b) Data is stored in a B+tree. (4 & 5)
(c) The B+tree is append-only. (3)
(d) Updates are performed in batches (aka. "group commit"). (3)
(e) All non-polylog state in RAM is in the form of cached B+tree pages which
    can be reloaded from disk as needed. (5)
(f) Cleaning is performed continuously in the background, at a rate based on
    the number of dirty pages and the cost of I/O. (6)
(g) Components interact via sockets using well-defined interfaces. (7)

Kivaloo is *not* designed for the following, and design/implementation
choices are made which make kivaloo unable to satisfy these non-goals:
1. Low latency (incompatible with goal #5).
2. Multiple columns (would reduce key-value storage performance).
3. Indexing of values (build your own indexes).
4. Large values (store them elsewhere and only keep the metadata in kivaloo).
5. Client authentication (build it yourself).

Operations
----------

The operations provided by kivaloo (via a stack of lbs/kvlds/mux*) are:
* PARAMS():
	Return the maximum permitted key and value lengths (up to 255 bytes,
	but possibly less).
* SET(key, value):
	Associate the value "value" with the key "key", replacing the
	previous value if one exists.
* CAS(key, oval, value):
	If the value "oval" is currently associated with the key "key",
	replace it with "value"; otherwise, do nothing.
* ADD(key, value):
	If there is no value currently associated with the key "key",
	associate the value "value"; otherwise, do nothing.
* MODIFY(key, value):
	If there a value currently associated with the key "key",
	replace it with the value "value"; otherwise, do nothing.
* DELETE(key):
	Delete the value (if any) associated with the key "key".
* CAD(key, oval):
	If the value "oval" is currently associated with the key "key",
	delete it; otherwise, do nothing.
* GET(key):
	Return the value (if any) associated with the key "key".
* RANGE(start, end, max):
	Return up to "max" bytes of key-value pairs with keys satisfying
	"start" <= key < "end", along with a value "next" such that all keys
	between "start" and "next" were returned.  If "end" or "next" is the
	empty key, it is compared as being greater than all possible keys
	(even though it is normally compared as being less than all other
	keys).  The server may return fewer key-value pairs than requested,
	and may return one pair even if the key-value pair is larger than
	"max" bytes.
Of these, SET/CAS/ADD/MODIFY/DELETE/CAD are referred to as "modifying
requests" (often abbreviated MR) while GET/RANGE are referred to as
"non-modifying requests" (often abbreviated NMR).

Any number of requests may be pending at once, and responses may come out of
order.  The kivaloo wire protocol uses sequence numbers to associate each
response with the corresponding request.

Block store operations
----------------------

The operations required of the underlying block store are:
* PARAMS(): [OBSOLETE]
	Return the block size (which must be at least 512 bytes and at most
	131072 bytes) and the first unused block number, which will be zero
	if there are no blocks.
* PARAMS2():
	Return the block size (in [512, 131072]), the first unused block
	number (which will be zero if there are no blocks), and the last used
	block number (which will be -1 if there are no blocks).
* GET(blkno):
	Return the data for block number "blkno".
* APPEND(blkno, nblk, data):
	If "blkno" is the the first unused block number (as returned by PARAM
	or a previous APPEND request) then the "nblk"s blocks of data "data"
	to blocks number "blkno", "blkno"+1, ... "blkno"+"nblk"-1.  Returns
	the next available block number, which is not required to be
	"blkno"+"nblk".  If the value "blkno" is incorrect, an error status
	is returned.  If the block store dies while an APPEND operation is in
	progress, it may have written some but not all blocks; but will never
	write the last block unless all previous blocks have been written.
* FREE(blkno):
	Optionally delete blocks with numbers less than "blkno".  (The block
	store may ignore this entirely or delete only some of the blocks, but
	should eventually delete most blocks in order to not waste storage
	space.)

Any number of GET requests may be pending at once; it is impossible to issue
more than one valid APPEND request at once (since the new "next block" value
is not known until the earlier request completes); issuing multiple FREE or
PARAMS requests is possible but pointless.

S3 operations
-------------

The kivaloo-s3 daemon provides an interface to Amazon S3 object operations,
abstracting away request queuing, DNS resolution, endpoint selection, and
retrying of requests which fail due to internal S3 errors (HTTP 500/503):
* PUT(bucket, object, len, data):
	Store the provided data to the specified bucket/object path.  Return
	the HTTP status code (200 for success; anything else is an error).
* GET(bucket, object, maxlen):
	Read the specified bucket/object, if it is no more than "maxlen"
	bytes in length.  Return the HTTP status code (200 for success), the
	object length, and the object data.  If the object is larger than
	"maxlen" bytes, an object length of -1 will be returned with no data.
	If the ETag provided by S3 does not match the MD5 of the object data,
	a status code of 0 will be returned.  On HTTP statuses other than 200,
	the returned length is unspecified and data MAY be provided.
* RANGE(bucket, object, offset, length):
	Read bytes "offset" ... "offset"+"length"-1 of the named bucket/object.
	Return the HTTP status code (206 for success), the number of bytes
	read (which may be less than "length" if object contains fewer than
	"offset"+"length" bytes), and the (partial) object data.  On HTTP
	statuses other than 206, the returned length is unspecified and data
	MAY be provided.
* HEAD(bucket, object):
	Issue a HEAD request for the specified bucket/object.  Return the HTTP
	status (200 for success) and the object length (if a Content-Length
	header is returned by S3).
* DELETE(bucket, object):
	Issue a DELETE request for the specified bucket/object.  Return the
	HTTP status (204 for success).

Consistency guarantees
----------------------

Requests are serializable to a schedule consistent with the following weak
ordering criteria on requests X and Y to which responses were sent:
* If a response to request X is received before request Y is sent, then X
  occurs before Y.
* If requests X and Y are both modifying requests and they have the same key
  and they were sent over the same connection, then X occurs before Y.

Providing that fsync flushes data to permanent storage, the above semantics
hold even in the presence of arbirary killing and restarting of components;
i.e., kivaloo is poweroff-safe.

Configuration
-------------

Kivaloo does not use any configuration files.  All required options are
specified at the command line.  (Of course, there is nothing to stop people
from writing wrapper scripts.)
